---
title: June 16th, 2020
---

## To do:
### DONE contact nanopore for help

### DONE contact DNA core for help

### DONE Email gitta with info on computational grant, also say yes with japan thing, ask about plan for jastro, and let her know about nanopore conference

### TODO find a date to do jessica grad photos

### read [[Genetic diversity and phylogeny of strains of Clavibacter nebraskensis associated with recent and historic Goss's wilt epidemics in the north Central USA]]

### TODO [[June 18th, 2020]] [[Genetic diversity and population structure of Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. nebraskensis]]

## Useful website for [calculating molecular weight of DNA](https://www.thermofisher.com/us/en/home/references/ambion-tech-support/rna-tools-and-calculators/dna-and-rna-molecular-weights-and-conversions.html)
### M.W. of dsDNA = (# nucleotides x 607.4) + 157.9

## Look into recommendations from Nanopore on [Low Pore Occupancy (below 40%)](https://community.nanoporetech.com/protocols/lambda-control-sqk-lsk109/v/cde_9062_v109_revr_14aug2019/issues-during-the-sequencing-run?devices=minion)
### {{[[table]]}}
#### Observation
##### Possible cause
###### Comments and actions

#### **Pore occupancy <40%**
##### Not enough library was loaded on the flow cell
###### 5–50 fmol of good quality library can be loaded on to a MinION Mk1B/GridION flow cell. Please quantify the library before loading and calculate mols using tools like the [Promega Biomath Calculator](https://www.promega.com/resources/tools/biomath/), choosing "dsDNA: µg to pmol"

#### **Pore occupancy close to 0**
##### The Ligation Sequencing Kit was used, and sequencing adapters did not ligate to the DNA
###### Make sure to use the NEBNext Quick Ligation Module (E6056) and Oxford Nanopore Technologies Ligation Buffer (LNB, provided in the SQK-LSK109 kit) at the sequencing adapter ligation step, and use the correct amount of each reagent. A Lambda control library can be prepared to test the integrity of the third-party reagents.

#### **Pore occupancy close to 0**
##### The Ligation Sequencing Kit was used, and ethanol was used instead of LFB or SFB at the wash step after sequencing adapter ligation
###### Ethanol can denature the motor protein on the sequencing adapters. Make sure the LFB or SFB buffer was used after ligation of sequencing adapters.

#### **Pore occupancy close to 0**
##### No tether on the flow cell
###### Tethers are adding during flow cell priming (FLT tube). Make sure FLT was added to FB before priming.
