---
title: 2020 Jastro Research Proposal Draft 2
---

- **Characterizing the Interactions Between Gram-positive Phytopathogen Clavibacter michiganensis and Plant Immunity**
- **Abstract ** (75-100words)
- Gram-positive (G+) actinobacteria of the Clavibacter genus are economically important bacterial pathogens known for their ability to cause canker and wilting diseases to a wide range of crops. Despite their agricultural impact, little is known about the importance of plant immunity impacting G+ actinobacterial pathogens. Plants to limit pathogen attack by perceiving structural components encoded by diverse pathogens of plants including fungi, insects, nematodes, oomycetes, and bacteria. The focus of this work is to identify these protein-coding components in G+ Clavibacter michiganensis, both previously known in other systems and novel, and characterize their interactions with plant immunity.  {{word-count}}
- **Background and rationale**
- Bacterial canker of tomato caused by __Clavibacter michiganensis____ __is a devastating disease to the tomato production industry. Current disease control measures include good horticultural practices and monitoring seed stock to prevent contamination. Despite this, outbreaks of Clavibacter michiganensis have occurred in previous years, particularly in California. For the the C. michiganensis-tomato pathosystem, there are no resistant commercial cultivars and lack of chemical control products, therefore systemic spread can occur. One explanation for why there are currently deficiencies in effective disease control strategies is due to unclear or unknown pathogenicity mechanisms and a lack of understanding of the role plant immunity has in restricting G+ Clavibacter pathogens. If G+ Clavibacter are perceived by plants, future work can focus on identifying cognate receptors necessary for recognition and potentially breed crops to express these receptors as means to improve defense responses, thus limiting disease outbreaks.
- Biotic colonizers possess conserved microbial elicitors which can be perceived by surface-localized plant immune receptors (Boutrot and Zipfel, 2014). These microbial associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) are structural components found in diverse pathogens including Gram-negative (G-) bacteria, insects, fungi, and nematodes (Choi and Klessig, 2016). Well known MAMPs include flg22, an immunogenic component of the flagella, and chitin, a polysaccharide in insects and fungi. Upon perception, an elicited immune response acts as a mechanism to limit pathogen attack. However, the importance of immune perception in G+ pathogens and whether these bacteria carry specific MAMPs remains unknown (Eichenlaub and Gartemann, 2011; Thapa et al., 2019). I hypothesize that G+ plant pathogens carry distinct MAMPs that can elicit an immune response in plant genotypes carrying cognate receptors. In addition to testing the response for well-characterized MAMPs encoded in the Clavibacter genome, I will query for G+ MAMPs conserved across the Clavibacter genus and test for perception and immune response on diverse plant species.
- **Identify specific objectives**
	- A. Identify G+ MAMPs from pathogenic Clavibacter bacteria
	- B. Investigate the importance of inducible plant defenses
- **Methods **
- **(1). Identify G+ MAMPs from pathogenic Clavibacter bacteria.** MAMPs display key signatures of selection, genes show overall negative selection with small regions of high positive selection. With the emergence of new genome sequences, especially complete genomes, multiple novel MAMPs have been discovered in G- pathogens (McCann et al., 2012; Chen et al., 2020). While not experimentally tested, this method predicted hypothesized MAMPs in G+ actinobacteria Rhodococcus (Thapa et al., 2019). I hypothesize that Clavibacter encodes for distinct MAMPs. Early assessments have shown that Cm genomes encoded for two known MAMPs previously identified in G-bacteria, the protein epitope of cold shock protein, csp22, and ribosomal elongation factor, elf18. Unlike many bacteria, Clavibacter are not flagellated and thus do not carry the well-known flagellin epitope, flg22. These well-known MAMPs will provide an initial ground for testing the importance of plant defense against G+ plant pathogens. To predict novel G+ MAMPs, I will use Get_Homologs to identify core genes shared between all Clavibacter. An initial ka/ks test will identify genes under overall negative selection and then a scanning-window approach used to filter genes that carry short regions of high positive selection (McCann et al., 2012). Additionally, I will use Tajima’s D to cross compare core genes that are not under neutral selection (Eckshtain‐Leviet al., 2018). I will generate a list of 10-15 candidate MAMPs for functional validation. I expect this component of the proposal to take 3-6 months.
- **(2). Investigate the importance of inducible plant defenses.** Plant-associated bacteria are known
  to encode many MAMPs (Boutrot and Zipfel, 2014). I hypothesize a subset of
  predicted Cm MAMPs will elicit a defense response on diverse plant species. The
  well-known MAMPs, csp22 and elf18, will provide an initial ground for testing
  the importance  of plant defense against G+ plant pathogens. I have obtained near-isogenic and transgenic tomato seed that can perceive csp22 and elf18, respectively, as well as their controls (Lacombe et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2016). Due to the near identical sequences of these MAMPs to those from Cm, I would expect them to elicit an immune response in plants carrying the cognate receptors. To verify Cm elf18 and csp22 are immunogenic, I will synthesize the peptide MAMPs, treat respective tomato genotypes, and quantify production of ROS and the expression of defense gene, PR-1, which should be induced compared to a scrambled peptide control. To assess the difference in response with xylem and apoplastic colonization, I will grow plants and assess bacterial titer using the inoculation methods described in preliminary studies, prick (stem) and spray (foliar) inoculation respectively. I will compare disease symptoms and  bacterial titer in other wise genetically identical plants that carry and do not carry the cognate receptor. If Cm elf18 and csp22 are perceived, then I expected disease and bacterial titer to decrease. A requirement for perception of MAMPs, novel and well-characterized, is the plant host carrying  the cognate receptor and downstream components.In is unclear if tomato alone carries these components for our candidate MAMPs. Therefore, I will test for response on diverse plant varieties. Candidate G+ MAMP peptides will be synthesized and tested for elicitation of an immune response in diverse plant species, some of which are known hosts of Clavibacter bacteria and others which have never been reported to be hosts. This includes the model plants Arabidopsis thaliana, Nicotiana benthamiana, the crops tomato Solanum lycopersicum cultivar Rio Grande, corn Zea mays, and diverse varieties of citrus from the Rutaceae family. I will measure the production of ROS as well as the production of ethylene, a defense plant hormone known to be induced in the Cm-tomato pathosystem. In both assays, a water treated mock plant will be used as a negative control. Any MAMPs which show promising responses can be further examined with a scrambled version of the peptide. I expect this component of the proposal to take 6 months to a year.
- **Your personal qualifications to do the research**
- I have considerable experience in molecular biology, especially working with
  Gram-positive plant pathogens and plant-associated bacteria. In addition, I
  have gained computational skills throughout the duration of my Ph.D. training and have contributed my skillsets to two projects lead by a postdoc and a graduate student in the lab that has lead to two preprints, which are both in review. Finally, the Coaker lab is known for much of it’s work on plant immunity, predominantly focused on a Gram-negative pathogen __Pseudomonas syringae __and the model plant __Arabidopsis __and the vector-borne bacterial pathogen __Candidatus__ Liberibacter asiaticus and diverse genotypes of citrus.____