---
title: 2020 Jastro Research Proposal Draft 1
---

- **Title of Proposal:**
	- Characterizing the Interactions Between Gram-positive Phytopathogen Clavibacter michiganensis and Tomato Immunity
- **Abstract/Summary (75‐100 words):**
	- Gram-positive (G+) actinobacteria of the Clavibacter genus are economically important bacterial pathogens known for their ability to cause canker and wilting diseases to a wide range of crops (Eichenlaub and Gartemann, 2011; Li et al., 2017). Despite their agricultural impact, little is known about the importance of plant immunity impacting G+ actinobacteria and how these pathogens cause disease (Thapa et al., 2019).
- {{embed  ((dd9012e7-cac7-44ac-84ca-9224f85b3041))}}
	- **Characterize the interactions between Clavibacter michiganensis and plant immunity.** Biotic colonizers possess conserved microbial elicitors which can be perceived by surface-localized plant immune receptors (Boutrot and Zipfel, 2014). These microbial associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) are structural components found in diverse pathogens including Gram-negative (G-) bacteria, insects, fungi, and nematodes (Choi and Klessig, 2016). Well known MAMPs include flg22, an immunogenic component of the flagella, and chitin, a polysaccharide in insects and fungi. Upon perception, an elicited immune response acts as a mechanism to limit pathogen attack. However, the importance of immune perception in G+ pathogens and whether these bacteria carry specific MAMPs remains unknown (Eichenlaub and Gartemann, 2011; Thapa et al., 2019). I hypothesize that G+ plant pathogens carry distinct MAMPs that can elicit an immune response in plant genotypes carrying cognate receptors. In addition to testing the response for well-characterized MAMPs encoded in the Clavibacter genome, I will query for G+ MAMPs conserved across the Clavibacter genus and test for perception and immune response on diverse plant species.
	- ^^A. Significance^^
		- Current disease control measures include good horticultural practices and monitoring seed stock to prevent contamination. Despite this, outbreaks of Clavibacter michiganensis have occurred in previous years, particularly in California. For the the C. michiganensis-tomato pathosystem, there are no resistant commercial cultivars and lack of chemical control products, therefore systemic spread can occur. One explanation for why there are currently deficiencies in effective disease control strategies is due to unclear or unknown pathogenicity mechanisms and a lack of understanding of the role plant immunity has in restricting G+ Clavibacter pathogens. If G+ Clavibacter are perceived by plants, future work can focus on identifying cognate receptors necessary for recognition and potentially breed crops to express these receptors as means to improve defense responses, thus limiting disease outbreaks.
- {{embed  ((9c102825-d060-4bf7-9562-a767305c827b))}}
	- **Plants developed innate immune systems for perception and elicitation of responses to limit pathogens.** While little is known regarding the interactions of plant immunity and G+  pathogens, convergent evolution of pathogens and plant hosts would suggest similar mechanisms of plant immune response (Upsonet al., 2018). Correspondingly, surfaced-localized pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) can perceive molecular features such as MAMPs, damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), and extracellular effector proteins from diverse pathogens (Boller and Felix, 2009; Couto and Zipfel, 2016). PRR  perception induces a variety of responses including the production of the antimicrobial agents’ reactive oxygen species (ROS), calcium influx, MAP kinase cascades, defense gene  expression, and biosynthesis of plant defense hormones such as salicylic acid (SA) and ethylene (Fig. 1 –Right)(Lolle et al., 2020). In the tomato-Cm pathosystem, it is possible for plant immunity to  be  activated  and  impact  disease;  applications of an analog of SA decrease bacterial titer and microarray analyses shows up-regulation of ethylene synthesis genes during tomato-Cm infection (Soylu et al., 2003; Balaji and Sessa, 2008; Balaji et al., 2008). By investigating plant responses to a G+ pathogens, genetic strategies can be used to develop more robust crops.
	- Aim 2: Characterize the interactions between Cm and plant immunity
		- **Identify G+ MAMPs from pathogenic Clavibacter bacteria**
		- **Investigate the importance of inducible plant defenses**
- {{embed  ((5f5bb904-79bd-43e0-aeee-f2cfbd544c71))}}
	- **(1). Identify G+ MAMPs from pathogenic Clavibacter bacteria.** MAMPs display key signatures of selection, genes show overall negative selection with small regions of high positive selection. With the emergence of new genome sequences, especially complete genomes, multiple novel MAMPs have been discovered in G- pathogens (McCann et al., 2012; Chen et al., 2020). While not experimentally tested, this method predicted hypothesized MAMPs in G+ actinobacteria Rhodococcus (Thapa et al., 2019). I hypothesize that Clavibacter encodes for distinct MAMPs. Early assessments have shown that Cm genomes encoded for two known MAMPs previously identified in G-bacteria, the protein epitope of cold shock protein, csp22, and ribosomal elongation factor, elf18. Unlike many bacteria, Clavibacter are not flagellated and thus do not carry the well-known flagellin epitope, flg22. These well-known MAMPs will provide an initial ground for testing the importance of plant defense against G+ plant pathogens. To predict novel G+ MAMPs, I will use Get_Homologs to identify core genes shared between all Clavibacter. An initial ka/ks test will identify genes under overall negative selection and then a scanning-window approach used to filter genes that carry short regions of high positive selection (McCann et al., 2012). Additionally, I will use Tajima’s D to cross compare core genes that are not under neutral selection (Eckshtain‐Leviet al., 2018). I will generate a list of 10-15 candidate MAMPs for functional validation.
	- **(2). Investigate the importance of inducible plant defenses**. Plant-associated bacteria are known to encode many MAMPs (Boutrot and Zipfel, 2014). I hypothesize a subset of predicted Cm MAMPs will elicit a defense response on diverse plant species. The well-known MAMPs, csp22 and elf18, will provide an initial ground for testing the importance  of plant defense against G+ plant pathogens. I have obtained near-isogenic and transgenic tomato seed that can perceive csp22 and elf18, respectively, as well as their controls (Lacombe et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2016). Due to the near identical sequences of these MAMPs to those from Cm, I would expect them to elicit an immune response in plants carrying the cognate receptors. To verify Cm elf18 and csp22 are immunogenic, I will synthesize the peptide MAMPs, treat respective tomato genotypes, and quantify production of ROS and the expression of defense gene, PR-1, which should be induced compared to a scrambled peptide control. To assess the difference in response with xylem and apoplastic colonization, I will grow plants and assess bacterial titer using the inoculation methods described in preliminary studies, prick (stem) and spray (foliar) inoculation respectively. I will compare disease symptoms and  bacterial titer in other wise genetically identical plants that carry and do not carry the cognate receptor. If Cm elf18 and csp22 are perceived, then I expected disease and bacterial titer to decrease similarly as plants pretreated with SA (Fig. 2A-D). A requirement for perception of MAMPs, novel  and well-characterized, is  the plant  host  carrying  the cognate receptor and downstream components.In is unclear if tomato alone carries these components for our candidate MAMPs. Therefore, I will test for response on diverse plant varieties. Candidate G+ MAMP peptides will be synthesized and tested for elicitation of an immune response in diverse plant species, some of which are known hosts of Clavibacter bacteria and others which have never been reported to be hosts. This includes the model plants Arabidopsis thaliana, Nicotiana benthamiana, the crops tomato Solanum lycopersicum cultivar Rio Grande, corn Zea mays, and diverse varieties of citrus from the Rutaceae family. I will measure the production of ROS as well as the production of ethylene, a defense plant hormone known to be induced in the Cm-tomato pathosystem. In both assays, a water treated mock plant will be used as a negative control. Any MAMPs which show promising responses can be further examined with a scrambled version of the peptide.
	- **Potential problems and alternate approaches:** If more stringent searches due not yield  any promising candidates, I can use these same features with known MAMP sequences to train on a machine learning model and apply this model to the identified core genes to identify candidates (Babayan et al., 2018). Additionally, other plant species could be tested. However, if neither of these provide any response, it is possible that immunity does not directly act on G+ bacteria. Considering no resistance genes have been identified for G+ pathogens, this result could be interesting alternate conclusion.
- {{embed  ((ef2184e7-bf1f-4e1d-b318-6cff793da321))}}
	-
-
-
-
-
- https://onedrive.live.com/?cid=FFD16E31AB085CD5&id=FFD16E31AB085CD5%21226912&parId=FFD16E31AB085CD5%21223889&o=OneUp