---
title: First Report of Goss’s Bacterial Wilt and Leaf Blight on Corn Caused by __Clavibacter michiganensis__ subsp. __nebraskensis__ in Alberta, Canada
---

- https://apsjournals.apsnet.org/doi/10.1094/PDIS-11-14-1117-PDN
- In August of 2013, leaves of hybrid grain and silage corn (__Zea mays__ L.) from four counties in southern Alberta and one county in central Alberta were observed to have symptoms characteristic of Goss’s bacterial wilt and leaf blight caused by __Clavibacter michiganensis__ subsp. __nebraskensis__ (Vidaver and Mandel) Davis et al. The average incidence of field symptoms was approximately 10% and ranged from trace levels to 25%. A total of 46 fields were surveyed and 11 suspicious samples were tested, six of which were confirmed to be positive for Goss’s bacterial wilt and leaf blight. The symptoms presented were large, tan-colored, intraveinal lesions with dark “freckles” apparent within some of the lesions. Bacteria streamed from symptomatic leaf tissues cut with a sterile scalpel and viewed under a compound, phase contrast microscope at 400× magnification. No fungal signs were observed when viewed under a binocular dissecting microscope at 80× magnification. The bacteria that streamed from leaves were small, pleomorphic, gram-positive rods. Bacteria were streaked onto nutrient agar and cream-colored colonies developed. The presence of bacteria from the genus __Clavibacter__ was confirmed using Agdia Immunostrip test kits (Agdia Inc., London, ON) for detection of __C. michiganensis__ subsp. __michiganensis__, but which also cross-react with __C. michiganensis__ subsp. __nebraskensis__. Positive test results were only obtained on symptomatic tissues and bacterial strains isolated from the symptomatic leaf tissues. DNA extraction and sequencing was performed on purified strains to confirm the presence of __C. michiganensis__ subsp. __nebraskensis__ with oligonucleotides PSA7F and PSAR specific for the 16S-23S ribosomal DNA intergenic spacer sequence ([Pastrik and Rainey 1999](https://apsjournals.apsnet.org/doi/10.1094/PDIS-11-14-1117-PDN#b3)). PCR amplification of the 394-bp sequence was performed and the amplicon sequence was submitted to GenBank (Accession No. KJ792867). Subsequent BLAST analysis of the resulting sequences indicated a 100% match for __C. michiganensis__ subsp. __nebraskensis__ (HE614873.1). Koch’s postulates were fulfilled by inoculating corn seedlings via stem injection with three purified strains of the putative __C. michigenesis__ subsp. __nebraskensis__ bacterium. All three strains caused symptoms of Goss’s leaf blight on corn leaves within 3 weeks and lesions displayed bacterial streaming. The bacteria that streamed from the lesions were small, gram-positive, pleomorphic rods and tested positive using Agdia Immunostrip test kits for __Clavibacter.__ No signs or symptoms of Goss’s bacterial wilt and leaf blight were seen in control plants. To our knowledge, this represents the first report of Goss’s bacterial wilt and leaf blight on corn in Alberta. Previous reports indicated that this disease is expanding into Canada ([Desjardins 2010](https://apsjournals.apsnet.org/doi/10.1094/PDIS-11-14-1117-PDN#b1)) and into new areas of the United States ([Korus et al. 2011](https://apsjournals.apsnet.org/doi/10.1094/PDIS-11-14-1117-PDN#b2)). Acres of silage, grazing, grain, fresh market, and processing corn have been steadily increasing in Alberta. Goss’s wilt represents a significant threat to the expanding corn industry in Alberta, particularly where susceptible corn varieties predominate.