---
title: USDA NIFA Predoctural Fellowship - Project Narrative - Draft 2
---

## **USDA-NIFA AFRI: ****Elucidating the interactions between Gram-positive, xylem-colonizing phytopathogens of the Clavibacter genus and their plant hosts**

## **Project Plans**
### **Introduction** {{comment-button}}
#### Gram-positive (G+) actinobacteria of the Clavibacter genus are economically important bacterial pathogens known for their ability to  cause  canker  and wilting diseases to  a wide range of  crops (Eichenlaub and Gartemann, 2011; Li et al., 2017). 

#### Bacterial canker of tomato caused by Clavibacter michiganensis is a devastating disease to the tomato production industry. Current disease control measures include good horticultural practices and monitoring seed stock to prevent contamination. Despite this, outbreaks of Clavibacter michiganensis have occurred in previous years, particularly in California, which produces over 90% of the world’s processing tomatoes and is an important cash crop. For the C. michiganensis-tomato pathosystem, there are no resistant commercial cultivars and lack of chemical control products leading to potential systemic spread. One explanation for why there are deficiencies in effective disease control strategies is due to unclear or unknown pathogenicity mechanisms and a lack of understanding of the role plant immunity has in restricting G+ Clavibacter pathogens (Thapa et al., 2019).

#### Despite their agricultural impact, little is known about  the  importance  of  plant  immunity  impacting G+  actinobacteria  and  how  these  pathogens cause  disease  (Thapa  et  al.,  2019).  Genes  important  for  pathogenicity  and  host  range  in  other pathogens include secreted protein effectors that suppress host immunity and enable colonization. Perception of effectors and protein elicitors enables the plant host to survey for antagonists and initiate an immune response for defense (Boutrot and Zipfel, 2014). As a result of an evolutionary arms  race,  symbiotic  and  pathogenic  bacteria  alike  have  evolved  to  evade  immunity  to  enable colonization  (Trda  et  al.,  2015).  However,  a  mechanistic  understanding  of  these  interactions  is unknown in many systems including G+ actinobacteria. Clavibacter pathogens’ unique host range provides an excellent system to study these processes. Pathogens of one host  are  endophytic on other hosts. Therefore, my research will focus on two major questions: 1) what genetic loci mediate pathogenicity  and  host  range  in  Clavibacter  and  2)  can  plant  immune  receptors  perceive  G+ bacteria?  Using  a  computational-driven  approach,  I  will  predict  candidate  effectors  involved  in pathogenicity  and host range  as well as protein  elicitors that may be perceived by plants. These candidate  loci  will  be  functionally  validated  to  better  understand  their  role  in  Clavibacter-plant interactions.  

### **Rationale and Significance** {{comment-button}}
#### The  data  generated  from  this  work  will  be  a  key  resource  for  other  researchers, provide insight into mechanisms of pathogenicity in the Clavibacter genus, and help decipher the importance of plant immunity for restricting G+ bacterial pathogens.

#### Outside  of  seed  control,  which  is  financially  expensive,  we  are  currently  deficient  in  effective disease  control  strategies  due  to  unclear  or  unknown  pathogenicity  mechanisms  and  a  lack  of understanding of the role plant immunity has in restricting G+ Clavibacter pathogens.  In order to address this, the genomes developed in this project will be a key resource to facilitate investigation of different Clavibacter species by the research community. Bacterial loci which are functionally validated for their role in pathogenicity can be targeted as means to limit disease development. If G+ Clavibacter  are perceived by plants, future work can focus on identifying cognate receptors necessary  for  recognition  and  potentially  breeding  crops  to  express  these  receptors  as  means  to improve defense responses, thus limiting disease outbreaks. Finally, this work will provide insights into the role of effector-driven host range.

### **Background and Preliminary Data**
#### **Clavibacter bacteria are host specific with many predicted virulence effectors.**
##### While the host range of the Clavibacter genus is broad, including monocots and dicots, the host range of each pathogen is narrow, where a pathogen of one host is endophytic on other hosts (Carlson and Vidaver, 1982; Thapa et al., 2017). There are six widely considered pathogens of the genus  including: Clavibacter  michiganensis (Cm-bacterial  canker  of  tomato), Clavibacter sepedonicus (Cs-potato  ring  rot), Clavibacter  capsici (Cc-bacterial  canker  of  pepper), Clavibacter insidiosus (Ci-bacterial wilt of alfalfa), Clavibacter nebraskensis (Cn-Goss’s wilt and  leaf  blight  of  corn),  and Clavibacter  tessellarius(Ct-bacterial  mosaic  on  wheat)  (Fig.  1 –Left) (Dye and Kemp, 1977; Eichenlaub and Gartemann, 2011; Li et al., 2017). Cm and Cc appear to be the only pathogenic species of the genus that break this rule, where both pathogens are weakly pathogenic on the respective pathogen’s known host, tomato and pepper (Fig. 1 –Left) (Yim et al., 2012). While the evolution of the genus is not well understood, previous work has suggested Clavibacter pathogens have undergone niche adaptation as a result of plant-microbe co-evolution (Bentley et al., 2008; Lu et al., 2018).

##### The  tomato  pathogen Cm is  the  most-well  studied. Cm carries  multiple  hypothesized virulence genes on two plasmids, pCM1 and pCM2, and in a ~129Kb pathogenicity island (PAI), chp/tomA(Meletzus et al., 1993; Eichenlaub and Gartemann, 2011). While the number, size, and gene content of plasmids vary within andacross  species, the entire chp/tomA PAI is only found in Cm(Thapa  et  al.,  2017;  Tambong  JT,  2017).Instead,  fragments  and/or  homologs  of  PAI members can be found in Cc, Cs, and Cigenomes (Bentley et al., 2008; Hwang et al., 2018; Lu et al., 2018). The chp/tomA PAI encodes suites of putative serine proteases of the Sbt, Chp, and Ppa families  and  carbohydrate  activating  enzymes  (CAZymes).  Functional  validation  of  some  of effectors include tomatinase, which degrades the plant defense compound α-tomatine, and celA, an  encoded  cellulase  which  breaks  down  the  major  carbohydrate  of  plant  cell  walls,  cellulose (Meletzus  et  al.,  1993;  Jahr  et  al.,  2000).  While  this  provides  insight  into  some  mechanisms  of disease for Cm in tomato, the plant host targets of most effectors are unknown (Nandi et al., 2018). Even less is known for other pathogens of the genus. 

##### To investigate if there is potential  for  effector-driven host  range,  I  initially  assessed  the  contribution  of  two  effector repertoire  families  (proteases  and  CAZymes).  I  generated  a Clavibacter protease  database  by compiling all predicted proteases from the reference genome of each species. I then filtered for the prediction  of  a  signal  peptide,  the  categorization  of  the  protease  to  a  known  protease  subfamily and removed  members that are predicted  to localize at the  membrane by SignalP5 and Phobius, HMMER against MEROPS, and BUSCA respectively (Käll et al., 2004; Armenteros et al., 2019; Rawlings et  al., 2018; Savojardo et al., 2018). Each publicly available Clavibacter genome was used  to  query  for  protease  hits.  To  assess  if  these  proteases  provided  a  signal  for  host  range, principle component analyses was conducted on the count matrix with individual strains labeled by their host range. CAZymes were predicted for each genome using the dbCan2 database (Zhang et  al.,  2018).  CAZymes  were  similarly  filtered  for  a  signal  peptide  prediction  using  SignalP4.1, SignalP5, and Phobius and principle component analyses was conducted on the count matrix with individual strains labeled by their host range. Finally, the average number of predicted proteases and  CAZymes  was  calculated  based  on  host  range.  The  data  suggests  pathogens  carry  more effectors than endophytes, but the content of CAZymes and protease can vary (Fig. 2A). Based on their clustering patterns, I would hypothesize that CAZymes are more likely to contribute to host range than proteases (Fig. 2B, C). However, these analyses are biased as the number of genomes analyzed are predominantly from the tomato pathogen Cm (Fig. 4A)

#### **Plants developed innate immune systems for perception and elicitation of responses to limit pathogens.**
##### While  little  is  known  regarding  the  interactions  of  plant  immunity  and  G+    pathogens, convergent  evolution  of  pathogens  and  plant  hosts  would  suggest  similar  mechanisms  of  plant immune  response  (Upson  et  al.,  2018).  Correspondingly,  surfaced-localized  pattern  recognition receptors (PRRs) can perceive molecularfeatures such as MAMPs, damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs), and extracellular effector proteins from diverse pathogens (Boller and Felix, 2009;  Couto  and  Zipfel,  2016).  PRR  perception  induces  a  variety  of  responses  including  the production  of  the antimicrobial agents’ reactive oxygen species (ROS), calcium influx, MAP kinase  cascades,  defense  gene  expression,  and  biosynthesis  of  plant  defense  hormones  such  as salicylic  acid  (SA)  and  ethylene  (Fig.  1 –Right)  (Lolle  et  al.,  2020).  In  the  tomato-Cmpathosystem, it is possible for plant immunity to be activated and impact disease; applications of an analog of SA decrease bacterial titer and microarray analyses shows up-regulation of ethylene synthesis genes during tomato-Cm infection (Soyluet al., 2003; Balaji and Sessa, 2008; Balaji et al., 2008). By investigating plant responses to a G+ pathogens, genetic strategies can be used to develop more robust crops.

### **Approach** {{comment-button}}
#### **Aim I. Investigate the diversity and evolution of pathogenic Clavibacter species and identify effectors that correlate with host range and pathogenicity.**

#### **(1) Generate a robust genomic data set as a resource for this and subsequent Clavibacter research**
##### In  order  to  predict  potential  effectors  involved  in  pathogenicity  and  host  range,  I  first  need  to generate a robust dataset of multiple high-quality genomes across all pathogens of the genus. As previously mentioned, the number of genomes other than Cmis lacking. Therefore,I will sequence and assemble genomes for other pathogens of the genus. Ihave collaborated with researchers who donated 61 strains of other pathogenic Clavibacter I will sequence using the NGS technologies, Illumina  and  Oxford  Nanopore  (Fig.  4B).  I  have  also  communicated  with  researchers  who  are willing to provide sequencing data pre-publication to create a total genomic dataset of ~140-150 genomes.  For  Illumina  sequencing,  I  will  prepare  barcoded  paired-end  libraries,  which  will  be sequenced on the MiSeq Illumina Platform at the UC Davis Genome Center. I aim to generate 4-5 Gb data for about 15 million reads with an average read coverage of 25-30X per isolate. For long read sequencing, I will finish generating ligation-based multiplexed libraries using 1D chemistry (LSK109) to run on an Oxford Nanopore MinION Mk1b. Overall, I aim to generate 30 Gb of data with an average read depth of 30X per isolate (based on initial run with an average read length of 28 kb, data not shown). Using Guppy (v1.1), the raw ion flux signal from the Nanopore MinION will be converted into fastq reads. To improve throughput and repeatability of genome assembly and  annotation,  Illumina  and  Nanopore  reads  will  be  then  passed  through  a  custom  Snakemake (v5.10.10) pipeline set up on a Docker container (v19.03.8). This pipeline includes demultiplexing both  read  data  sets  using  Trimmomatic  (v0.39)  and  qcat  (v1.1.0)  respectively,  assembly  using Unicycler (v0.4.8), and annotation via  prokka (v1.14.6). The pipeline additionally assess potential read  contamination  via  bbtools  (v37.62)  and  assembly  statistics  through  Quast  (v5.0.2).  The pipeline was built from a published dataset with similar read collection (Wick et al., 2017).

#### **(2) Predict effectors involved in pathogenicity and host range.**
##### In  order  to  evade  immunity, acquire  nutrients,  and  potentially  alter  metabolism,  both  pathogens  and  endophytes  secrete effectors  (Trda  et  al.,  2015; Rodriguez  et  al.,  2019). I  hypothesize  that  effectors  drive  the  host range observedin the Clavibacter genus.For effector prediction, I will classify effectors into three groups: proteases, CAZymes, and other secreted proteins. For potential secreted proteases, I will use the database of predicated proteases I have curated and use the BLAST+ suite to query across all strains to identify potential protease effectors involved in pathogenicity. Predicted effectors will be filtered by signal peptide prediction via a 2/3 hit  criteria from Phobius, SignalP4.1, SignalP5 (Käll et al., 2004; Petersen et al., 2011; Armenteros et al., 2019).While many studies have focused on   proteases   predominately   found   in   the Cm   chp/tomA PAI,   considering   the   degree   of fragmentation  this  island  has  undergone  in  other  species,  it  is  possible  other  secreted  proteases impact pathogenicity and host range, especially in pathogens other than Cm(Fig. 3A, C) (Hwang et al., 2015; Ahmad et al., 2015; Lu et al., 2018). For potential carbohydrate activating enzymes (CAZymes),  the  annotated  genomes  will  be  fed  into  the  CAZyme  prediction  database,  dbCan2 (Zhang et al., 2018). CAZyme effectors will be filtered for signal peptide sequence based on the same  criteria  as  above.  Prediction  of  signal  peptide  sequences  will  determine  other  effector candidates. 

##### I  will  identify  orthogroups  and  categorize  core,  variable,  and  unique  effectors  using Get_Homologs  (Contreras-Moreira  and  Vinuesa,  2013).  For  all  effectors,  similarity  by  percent identity will be calculated  in an ortholog-focused manner. Selection will be determined  through ka/ks  test  within  and  across  species  to  assess  if  effector  homologs  are  under  different  selection pressures.  To  identifyeffectors  that  are  not  under  neutral  selection,  a  result  of  co-evolution  of plant-pathogen interactions, Tajma’s D will be calculated and compared to neutrally evolving housekeeping genes (Eckshtain‐Levi et al., 2018). Finally, I will generate phylogenetic gene trees for effector homologs to assess if they underwent similar selection as described for the genus or if any has undergone gain-loss events. I expect gene trees to form monophyletic clades based on the host range of the strain if they arise from acommon ancestor which undergone host adaption. All the  above  experiments  will  be  interpreted  with  available  virulence  data.  In  combination,  I anticipate being able to predict which effectors are essential for pathogenicity across all or a subset of pathogenic species and identify variable effectors essential for pathogenicity on a given host.

#### **(3) Functionally assess predicted effector loci.**
##### In  order  to  assess  which in  silico predicted effectors  drive  pathogenicity  and  host  range,  I  will  use  genetic  and  biochemical  assays  for functional assessment. I hypothesize that a subset of predicted effectors will be essential for the ability  of  that  pathogen  to  colonize  and  cause  diseaseon  its  respective  plant  host.The  exact experiments necessary to functionally investigate the importance of specific effectors will depend on their predicted function. However, based on previous work as well as the preliminary analyses shown,  secreted  proteases  and  CAZymes  are  likely  candidates  for  mediating  these  processes. Clustered  effectors  will  be  preferentially  selected  for  deletion  analyses.  Due  to  their  proteolytic nature,  proteases  are  likely  to  target  plant  host  proteins  for  successful  colonization.  Therefore, proteases of interest will be purified and TAILS-Mass Spectroscopy, which relies of isotopically labeling  the  N-termini  amine  groups  of  a  proteome  sample,  will  be  ran  against  xylem  fluid  to identify potential plant targets (Kleifeld et al., 2010). Endophytes closely related to pathogens in the genus can be used as a genetic background to test effector contribution to a respective disease. For  example,  I  could  express  a  cluster  of  effectors  hypothesized  to  be  important  for  disease  in tomato  inan  endophyte  background  and  assess  differences  in  wilting,  canker  formation,  and in planta colonization compared to both wildtype endophyte and pathogen control. If I hypothesize effectors are important for host specificity in tomato, I could transform this expression vector into another pathogen which typically grows endophytically onto tomato, such as the potato pathogen Cs, and similarly assess for differences in wilting, canker formation, and in planta colonization on tomato. If these effectors contribute to pathogenicity, disease and/or colonization will increase; if these effectors contribute to host range, a pathogen which is previously endophytic on tomato will increase  in  its  ability  to  cause  disease  and/or  colonize.  CAZymes,  which  are  thought  to  be important for these processes, can be assessed for their ability to break down cell walls of different plant  hosts.Cell-wall  composition  can  be  evaluated  through  an  ELISA  test  that  recognizes different epitopes of plant call walls (Thapa et al., 2017)

#### **Aim 2: Characterize the interactions between Cm and plant immunity**

#### **(1). Identify G+ MAMPs from pathogenic Clavibacter bacteria.**
##### MAMPs display key signatures of  selection,  genes  show  overall  negative  selection  with  small  regions  of  very  high  positive selection.With the emergence of many genome sequences, especially complete genomes, multiple novel MAMPs have been discovered  in G-pathogens (McCann et al., 2012; Chen  et al., 2020). While not experimentally tested, this method predicted hypothesized MAMPs in G+ actinobacteria Rhodococcus (Thapa  et  al.,  2019). I  hypothesize  that Clavibacter encodes  for  distinct  MAMPs.Early  assessments  have  shown  that Cm genomes  encoded  for  two  known  MAMPs  previously identified in G-bacteria, the protein epitope of cold shock protein, csp22, and ribosomal elongation factor, elf18. Unlike many bacteria, Clavibacter are not flagellated and thus do not carry the well-known  flagellin  epitope,  flg22.  These  well-known  MAMPs  will  provide  an  initial  ground  for testing the importance of plant defense against G+ plant pathogens. To predict novel G+ MAMPs, I will use Get_Homologs to identify core genes shared between all Clavibacter pathogen genomes. An  initial  ka/ks  test  will  identify  genes  under  overall  negative  selection  and  then  a  scanning-window approach used to filter genes that carry short regions of high positive selection (McCann et al., 2012). Additionally, Tajima’s D will be used to cross compare for core genes that are not under  neutral  selection  (Eckshtain‐Levi et al., 2018).  I  will  generate  a  list  of  10-15  candidate MAMPs for functional validation.

#### **(2). Investigate the importance of inducible plant defenses.**
##### Plant-associated bacteria are known to  encode  many  MAMPs  (Boutrot  and  Zipfel,  2014). I  hypothesize  a  subset  of  predicted CmMAMPs will elicit a defense response on diverse plant species. The well-known MAMPs, csp22 and  elf18,  will  provide  an  initial  ground  for  testing  the  importance  of  plant  defense  against  G+ plant pathogens. I have obtained near-isogenic and transgenic tomato seed that can perceive csp22 and elf18, respectively, as well as their controls (Lacombe etal., 2010; Wang et al., 2016). Due to the near identical sequences of these MAMPs to those from Cm, I would expect them to elicit an immune  response  in  plants  carrying  the  cognate  receptors.  To  verify Cm elf18  and  csp22  are immunogenic,  I  will  synthesize the  peptide  MAMPs,  treat  respective  tomato  genotypes,  and quantify production of ROS and the expression of defense gene, PR-1, which should be induced compared to a scrambled peptide control. To assess the difference in response within xylem and apoplasticcolonization, I will grow plants and assess bacterial titer using the inoculation methods described  in  preliminary  studies,  prick  (stem)  and  spray  (foliar)  inoculation  respectively.  I  will compare disease symptoms and bacterial titer in otherwise genetically identical plants that carry and do not carry the cognate receptor. If Cmelf18 and csp22 are perceived, then I expected disease and bacterial titer to decrease similarly as plants pretreated with SA (Fig. 2A-D). Similarly,  to  measure  if  novel  G+  MAMPs  induce  an  immune  response,  it  relies  on  the plant  host  carrying  the  cognate  receptor  and  downstream  components.  Candidate  G+  MAMP peptides  will  be  synthesized  and  tested  for  elicitation  of  an  immune  response  in  diverse  plant species, some of which are known hosts of Clavibacter bacteria and others which have never been reported to be hosts. This includes the model plants Arabidopsis thaliana, Nicotiana benthamiana, the crops tomato Solanum lycopersicum cultivar Rio Grande, corn Zea mays, and diverse varieties of citrus from the Rutaceae family. I will measure the production of ROS as well as the production of ethylene, a defense plant hormone known to be induced in the Cm-tomato pathosystem. In both assays, a water treated mock plant will be used as a negative control. Any MAMPs which show promising responses can be further examined with a scrambled version of the peptide

## 
